OPERATION COBALT KITTY: A LARGE-
SCALE APT IN ASIA CARRIED OUT BY THE
OCEANLOTUS GROUP

MAY 24, 2017

9 minutes to read

Written by:
ASSAF DAHAN

W eb page converted to PDF w ith the PDFmyURL PDF creation API!

 
 
 
TOPICS

advanced
persistent
threat

SHARE

Dubbed Operation Cobalt Kitty, the APT targeted a global corporation based in Asia

with the goal of stealing proprietary business information. The threat actor targeted

the company’s top-level management by using spear-phishing attacks as the initial

penetration vector, ultimately compromising the computers of vice presidents,

senior directors and other key personnel in the operational departments. During

Operation Cobalt Kitty, the attackers compromised more than 40 PCs and servers,

including the domain controller, (cid:37)le servers, Web application server and database

server.

Forensic artifacts revealed that the attackers persisted on the network for at least

a year before Cybereason was deployed. The adversary proved very adaptive and

responded to company’s security measures by periodically changing tools,

techniques and procedures (TTPs), allowing them to persist on the network for such

an extensive period of time. Over 80 payloads and numerous domains were

observed in this operation - all of which were undetected by traditional security

products deployed in the company’s environment at the time of the attack.

The attackers arsenal consisted of modi(cid:37)ed publicly-available tools as well as six

undocumented custom-built tools, which Cybereason considers the threat actor’s

signature tools. Among these tools are two backdoors that exploited DLL

sideloading attack in Microsoft, Google and Kaspersky applications. In addition, they

developed a novel and stealthy backdoor that targets Microsoft Outlook for

command-and-control channel and data ex(cid:37)ltration.

W eb page converted to PDF w ith the PDFmyURL PDF creation API!

Based on the tools, modus operandi and IOCs (indicators of compromise) observed

Based on the tools, modus operandi and IOCs (indicators of compromise) observed

in Operation Cobalt Kitty,  Cybereason attributes this large-scale cyber espionage

APT to the “OceanLotus Group” (which is also known as, APT-C-00, SeaLotus and

APT32). For detailed information tying Operation Cobalt Kitty to the OceanLotus

Group, please see our Attacker’s Arsenal and Threat Actor Pro(cid:37)le sections.

Cybereason also attributes the recently reported Backdoor.Win32.Denis to the

OceanLotus Group, which at the time of this report’s writing, had not been of(cid:37)cially

linked to this threat actor.

Finally, this report offers a rare glimpse into what a cyber espionage APT looks like

"under-the-hood". Cybereason was able to monitor and detect the entire attack

lifecycle, from in(cid:37)ltration to ex(cid:37)ltration and all the steps in between.

Our report contains the following detailed sections (PDF):

 Cobalt Kitty Lifecycle: A step-by-step analysis

 Cobalt Kitty Attacker’s Arsenal: Deep dive into the tools used in the APT

 Cobalt Kitty Threat Actor Pro(cid:37)le and Indicators of Compromise

HIGH-LEVEL ATTACK OUTLINE:  A CAT-AND-
MOUSE GAME IN FOUR ACTS

W eb page converted to PDF w ith the PDFmyURL PDF creation API!

The following sections outline the four phases of the attack as observed by

Cybereason’s analysts, who were called to investigate the environment after the

company’s IT department suspected that their network was breached but could not

trace the source.

PHASE ONE: FILELESS OPERATION (POWERSHELL
AND COBALT STRIKE PAYLOADS)

Based on the forensic evidence collected from the environment, phase one was the

continuation of the original attack that began about a year before Cybereason was

deployed in the environment. During that phase, the threat actor operated a (cid:37)leless

PowerShell-based infrastructure, using customized PowerShell payloads taken

from known offensive frameworks such as Cobalt Strike, PowerSploit and Nishang.

The initial penetration vector was carried out by social engineering. Carefully

selected group of employees received spear-phishing emails, containing either links

to malicious sites or weaponized Word documents. These documents contained

malicious macros that created persistence on the compromised machine using two

scheduled tasks, whose purpose was to download secondary payloads (mainly

Cobalt Strike Beacon):

Scheduled task 1: Downloads a COM scriptlet that redirects to Cobalt Strike
Scheduled task 1:

W eb page converted to PDF w ith the PDFmyURL PDF creation API!

payload:

Scheduled task 2: Uses Javascript to download a Cobalt Strike Beacon:
Scheduled task 2:

See more detailed analysis of the malicious documents in our Attack Life Cycle

section.

W eb page converted to PDF w ith the PDFmyURL PDF creation API!

FILELESS PAYLOAD DELIVERY
FILELESS PAYLOAD DELIVERY
INFRASTRUCTURE
INFRASTRUCTURE

INFRASTRUCTURE
INFRASTRUCTURE

In the (cid:37)rst phase of the attack, the attackers used a (cid:37)leless in-memory payload

delivery infrastructure consisting of the following components:

VBS and PowerShell-based loaders
1.  VBS and PowerShell-based loaders

The attackers dropped Visual Basic and PowerShell scripts in folders that they

created under the ProgramData (a hidden folder, by default). The attackers created

persistence using Windows’ registry, services and scheduled tasks. This persistence

mechanism ensured that the loader scripts would execute either at startup or at

predetermined intervals.

Values found in Windows’ Registry: the VBS scripts are executed by Windows’

W eb page converted to PDF w ith the PDFmyURL PDF creation API!

Wscript at startup:

Wscript at startup:

The .vbs scripts as well as the .txt (cid:37)les contain the loader’s script, which launches

PowerShell with a base64 encoded command, which either loads another

PowerShell script (e.g Cobalt Strike Beacon) or fetches a payload from the

command-and-control (C&C) server:

In-memory (cid:28)leless payloads from C&C servers
2.  In-memory (cid:28)leless payloads from C&C servers

The payloads served by the C&C servers are mostly PowerShell scripts with

embedded base64-encoded payloads (Metasploit and Cobalt Strike payloads):

W eb page converted to PDF w ith the PDFmyURL PDF creation API!

Example 1:  PowerShell payload with embedded Shellcode downloading
Example 1:  PowerShell payload with embedded Shellcode downloading

Cobalt Strike Beacon
Cobalt Strike Beacon

The decoded payload is a shellcode, whose purpose is to retrieve a Cobalt Strike

Beacon from the C&C server:

W eb page converted to PDF w ith the PDFmyURL PDF creation API!

Example 2: Cobalt Strike Beacon embedded in obfuscated PowerShell
Example 2: Cobalt Strike Beacon embedded in obfuscated PowerShell

A second type of an obfuscated PowerShell payload consisted of Cobalt Strike’s

Beacon payload:

Less than 48 hours after Cybereason alerted the company about the
Less than 48 hours after Cybereason alerted the company about the

breach, the attackers started to change their approach and almost completely
breach

W eb page converted to PDF w ith the PDFmyURL PDF creation API!

abandoned the PowerShell infrastructure that they had been using - replacing it

with sophisticated custom-built backdoors. The attackers’ remarkable ability to

quickly adapt demonstrated their skill and familiarity with and command of the

company’s network and its operations.

The attackers most likely replaced the PowerShell infrastructure after the company

used both Windows Group Policy Object (GPO) and Cybereason’s execution

prevention feature to prevent PowerShell execution.

PHASE TWO: BACKDOORS EXPLOITING DLL-
PHASE TWO: BACKDOORS EXPLOITING DLL-
HIJACKING AND USING DNS TUNNELING
HIJACKING AND USING DNS TUNNELING

After realizing that the PowerShell infrastructure had been discovered, the

attackers had to quickly replace it to maintain persistence and continue the

operation. Replacing this infrastructure in 48 hours suggests that the threat actors

were prepared for such a scenario.

the attackers introduced two
During the second phase of the attack, the attackers introduced two

sophisticated backdoors that they attempted to deploy on selected
sophisticated backdoors that they attempted to deploy on selected

targets.  The introduction of the backdoors is a key turning point in the
targets. 

investigation since it demonstrated the threat actor’s resourcefulness and skill-set.

At the time of the attack, these backdoors were undetected and
At the time of the attack, these backdoors were undetected and

W eb page converted to PDF w ith the PDFmyURL PDF creation API!

undocumented by any security vendor. Recently, Kaspersky researchers identi(cid:37)ed
undocumented

undocumented by any security vendor. Recently, Kaspersky researchers identi(cid:37)ed
undocumented

a variant of one of the backdoors as Backdoor.Win32.Denis. The attackers had to

make sure that they remained undetected so the backdoors were designed to be as

stealthy as possible. To avoid being discovered, the malware authors used these

techniques:

Backdoors exploiting DLL hijacking against trusted applications
Backdoors exploiting DLL hijacking against trusted applications

The backdoor exploited a vulnerability called “DLL hijacking

DLL hijacking” in order to “hide” the

malware inside trusted software. This technique exploits a security vulnerability

found in legitimate software, which allows the attackers to load a fake DLL and

execute its malicious code.

Please see an analysis of the backdoors in the Attacker’s Arsenal section.

The attackers exploited this vulnerability against the following trusted applications:

 Windows Search (vulnerable applications: 

Windows Search (vulnerable applications:  searchindexer.exe

/searchprotoclhost.exe)

 Fake DLL:

Fake DLL: msfte.dll (638b7b0536217c8923e856f4138d9caff7eb309d)

W eb page converted to PDF w ith the PDFmyURL PDF creation API!

W eb page converted to PDF w ith the PDFmyURL PDF creation API!

 Google Update

Google Update  (d30e8c7543adbc801d675068530b57d75cabb13f)

 Fake DLL

Fake DLL: goopdate.dll (973b1ca8661be6651114edf29b10b31db4e218f7)

W eb page converted to PDF w ith the PDFmyURL PDF creation API!

 
 
 Kaspersky’s Avpia 

Kaspersky’s Avpia  (691686839681adb345728806889925dc4eddb74e)

 Fake DLL:

Fake DLL: product_info.dll (3cf4b44c9470fb5bd0c16996c4b2a338502a7517)

By exploiting legitimate software, the attackers bypassed application whitelisting

and legitimate security software, allowing them to continue their operations without

raising any suspicions.
W eb page converted to PDF w ith the PDFmyURL PDF creation API!

 
raising any suspicions.

DNS Tunneling as C2 channel -
DNS Tunneling as C2 channel -

In attempt to overcome network (cid:37)ltering solutions, the attackers implemented a

stealthier C2 communication method, using “DNS Tunneling” – a method of C2

communicating and data ex(cid:37)ltration using the DNS protocol. To ensure that the DNS

traf(cid:37)c would not be (cid:37)ltered, the attackers con(cid:37)gured the backdoor to communicate

with Google and OpenDNS DNS servers, since most organizations and security

products will not (cid:37)lter traf(cid:37)c to those two major DNS services.

W eb page converted to PDF w ith the PDFmyURL PDF creation API!

The screenshot below shows the traf(cid:37)c generated by the backdoor and

demonstrates DNS Tunneling for C2 communication. As shown, while the destination

IP is “8.8.8.8” – Google’s DNS server – the malicious domain is “hiding” inside the

DNS packet:

PHASE THREE: NOVEL MS OUTLOOK
PHASE THREE: NOVEL MS OUTLOOK
BACKDOOR AND LATERAL MOVEMENT SPREE
BACKDOOR AND LATERAL MOVEMENT SPREE

W eb page converted to PDF w ith the PDFmyURL PDF creation API!

In the third phase of the operation, the attackers harvested credentials stored on

the compromised machines and performed lateral movement and infected new

introduced a very rare and stealthy technique
machines. The attackers also introduced a very rare and stealthy technique

Microsoft Outlook.
to communicate with their servers and ex(cid:37)ltrate data using Microsoft Outlook

OUTLOOK MACRO BACKDOOR
OUTLOOK MACRO BACKDOOR

W eb page converted to PDF w ith the PDFmyURL PDF creation API!

In a relentless attempt to remain undetected, the attackers devised a very stealthy

In a relentless attempt to remain undetected, the attackers devised a very stealthy

C2 channel that is hard to detect since it leverages an email-based C2 channel. The

attackers installed a backdoor macro in Microsoft Outlook

installed a backdoor macro in Microsoft Outlook that enabled them

to execute commands, deploy their tools and steal valuable data from the

compromised machines.

For a detailed analysis of the Outlook backdoor, please see the Attacker’s Arsenal

section.

This technique works as follows:

W eb page converted to PDF w ith the PDFmyURL PDF creation API!

1.  The malicious macro scans the victim’s Outlook inbox and looks for the strings

“$$ecpte”.
“$$cpte” and “$$ecpte”
“$$cpte”

2.  Then the macro will open a CMD shell that will execute whatever instruction /

command is in between the strings.

3.  The macro deletes the message from inbox to ensure minimal risk of exposure.

4.  The macro searches for the special strings in the “Deleted Items” folder to (cid:37)nd

the attacker’s email address and sends the data back to the attackers via email.

5.  Lastly, the macro will delete any evidence of the emails received or sent by the

attackers.

CREDENTIAL DUMPING AND LATERAL
CREDENTIAL DUMPING AND LATERAL
MOVEMENT
MOVEMENT

The attackers used the famous Mimikatz

Mimikatz credential dumping tool as their main

tool to obtain credentials including user passwords, NTLM hashes and Kerberos

tickets. Mimikatz is a very popular tool and is detected by most antivirus vendors

and other security products. Therefore, the attackers used over 10 different

customized Mimikatz payloads, which were obfuscated and packed in a way that

allowed them to evade antivirus detection.

W eb page converted to PDF w ith the PDFmyURL PDF creation API!

The following are examples of Mimikatz command line arguments detected during

The following are examples of Mimikatz command line arguments detected during

the attack:  

The stolen credentials were used to infect more machines, leveraging Windows

built-in tools as well as pass-the-ticket and pass-the-hash attacks.

W eb page converted to PDF w ith the PDFmyURL PDF creation API!

PHASE FOUR: NEW ARSENAL AND ATTEMPT
PHASE FOUR: NEW ARSENAL AND ATTEMPT
TO RESTORE POWERSHELL
TO RESTORE POWERSHELL
INFRASTRUCTURE
INFRASTRUCTURE

After a four week lull and no apparent malicious activity, the attackers returned to

the scene and introduced new and improved tools aimed at bypassing the security

mitigations that were implemented by the company’s IT team. These tools and

mainly allowed them to bypass the PowerShell execution
methods mainly allowed them to bypass the PowerShell execution

restrictions and password dumping mitigations.
restrictions and password dumping mitigations

During that phase, Cybereason found a compromised server that was used as the

main attacking machine, where the attackers stored their arsenal in a network

share, which made it easier to spread their tools to other machines on the network.

The attackers’ arsenal consisted:

 New variants of Denis and Goopy backdoors
New variants of Denis and Goopy backdoors

 PowerShell Restriction Bypass Tool

PowerShell Restriction Bypass Tool --  Adapted from PSUnlock Github

W eb page converted to PDF w ith the PDFmyURL PDF creation API!

project.

 PowerShell Cobalt Strike Beacon -

PowerShell Cobalt Strike Beacon -  New payload + new C2 domain

 PowerShell Obfuscator -

PowerShell Obfuscator -  All the new PowerShell payloads are obfuscated
using a publicly available script adapted from a Daniel Bohannon’s GitHub project.

 HookPasswordChange

HookPasswordChange  --  Inspired by tools found on GitHub, this tool alerts the

attackers if a password has been changed. Using this tool, the attackers could
overcome a password reset. The attackers modi(cid:37)ed their tool.

 Customized Windows Credentials Dumper -

Customized Windows Credentials Dumper -  A PowerShell password
dumper that is based on a known password dumping tool, using PowerShell
bypass and re(cid:75)ective loading. The attackers speci(cid:37)cally used it to obtain Outlook
passwords.

 Customized Outlook Credentials Dumper -

Customized Outlook Credentials Dumper -  Inspired by known Outlook

credentials dumpers.

Mimikatz -  PowerShell and Binary versions, with multiple layers of

 Mimikatz -
obfuscation.

Please see the Attacker’s Arsenal section for detailed analysis of the tools.

An analysis of this arsenal shows that the attackers went out of their way to

restore the PowerShell-based infrastructure, even though it had already been

detected and shut down once. The attackers’ preference to use a (cid:37)leless

infrastructure speci(cid:37)cally in conjunction with Cobalt Strike is very evident. This

W eb page converted to PDF w ith the PDFmyURL PDF creation API!

could suggest that the attackers preferred to use known tools that are more

could suggest that the attackers preferred to use known tools that are more

expendable rather than using their own custom-built tools, which were used as a

last resort.

CONCLUSION
CONCLUSION

Operation Cobalt Kitty was a major cyber espionage APT that targeted a global

corporation in Asia and was carried out by the OceanLotus Group. The analysis of

this APT proves how determined and motivated the attackers were. They

continuously changed techniques and upgraded their arsenal to remain under the

radar. In fact, they never gave up, even when the attack was exposed and shut

down by the defenders.

During the investigation of Operation Cobalt Kitty, Cybereason uncovered and

analyzed new tools in the OceanLotus Group’s attack arsenal, such as:

 New backdoor (“Goopy”) using HTTP and DNS Tunneling for C2 communication.

 Undocumented backdoor that used Outlook for C2 communication and data

ex(cid:37)ltration.

 Backdoors exploiting DLL sideloading attacks in legitimate applications from

Microsoft, Google and Kaspersky.

 Three customized credential dumping tools, which are inspired by known tools.

W eb page converted to PDF w ith the PDFmyURL PDF creation API!

In addition, Cybereason uncovered new variants of the “Denis” backdoor and

In addition, Cybereason uncovered new variants of the “Denis” backdoor and

managed to attribute the backdoor to the OceanLotus Group - a connection that had

not been publicly reported before.

This report provides a rare deep dive into a sophisticated APT that was carried out

by one of the most fascinating groups operating in Asia. The ability to closely

monitor and detect the stages of an entire APT lifecycle - from initial in(cid:37)ltration to

data ex(cid:37)ltration - is far from trivial.

The fact that most of the attackers’ tools were not detected by the antivirus

software and other security products deployed in the company’s environment before

Cybereason, is not surprising. The attackers obviously invested signi(cid:37)cant time and

effort in keeping the operation undetected, striving to evade antivirus detection.

As the investigation progressed, some of the IOCs observed in Operation Cobalt

Kitty started to emerge in the wild, and recently some were even reported being

used in other campaigns. It is important to remember, however, that IOCs have a

tendency to change over time. Therefore, understanding a threat actor’s behavioral

patterns is essential in combatting modern and sophisticated APTs. The modus

operandi and tools served as behavioral (cid:37)ngerprints also played an important role

in tying Operation Cobalt Kitty to the OceanLotus Group.

Lastly, our research provides an important testimony to the capabilities and

working methods of the OceanLotus Group. Operation Cobalt Kitty is unique in many

ways, nonetheless, it is still just one link in the group’s ever-growing chain of APT

W eb page converted to PDF w ith the PDFmyURL PDF creation API!

campaigns. Orchestrating multiple APT campaigns in parallel and attacking a broad

campaigns. Orchestrating multiple APT campaigns in parallel and attacking a broad

spectrum of targets takes an incredible amount of resources, time, manpower and

motivation. This combination is likely to be more common among nation-state

actors. While the are many rumours and speculations circulating in the InfoSec

community, at the time of writing, there was no publicly available evidence that can

con(cid:37)rm that the OceanLotus Group is a nation-state threat actor.

Until such evidence is made public, we will leave it to our readers to judge for

themselves.

To be continued ... Meow.

LEARN MORE ABOUT CYBEREASONS NGAV AND HOW IT CAN PROTECT
YOUR ORGANIZATION

LEARN
MORE

W eb page converted to PDF w ith the PDFmyURL PDF creation API!

ADVANCED PERSISTENT
THREAT (APT) 101

APTS, THE BOARD, AND YOU

WHY ANTIVIRUS SOFTWARE
IS BECOMING THE ROOTKIT
YOU PAY FOR

READ
MORE

READ
MORE

READ
MORE

Return to Blog

SUBSCRIBE FOR UPDATES 

SHARE

W eb page converted to PDF w ith the PDFmyURL PDF creation API!

日本語

Contact Bl og

Podcas t

   

   
 
 
PRODUCTS

Deep Detect &
Respond

Deep
Prevent

Deep
Investigate

Deep
Respond

RansomFree

Demos

SERVICES

Deep
Monitoring

Deep
Hunting

Deep Incident
Response

PLATFORM

How It
Works

Deep Behav ioral
Intel Engine

Deep Sensor
Architecture

Customer Service &
Success

Complete Security
Visibility

Full Theater
View

Compliance &
Certi(cid:45)cation

COMPANY

Who We
Are

Careers

Management

Newsroom

Awards

Contact
Us

PARTNER

Become a Partner

RANSOMFREE

Free ransomware
protection for your
PC

INSIGHTS

Webinars

Videos

White
Papers

Research

Quick
Reads

"Cybereason” and 

 are proprietary trademarks of Cybereason Inc.  Cybereason
®
 is federally registered in the United States and other countries

Copyright ©  2018 Cybereason Inc. All rights reserved.

Terms of Use | Privacy Policy

W eb page converted to PDF w ith the PDFmyURL PDF creation API!

 
