threat actor to return soon.SearchEnter Your Email Address

Following the disclosure, the attackers moved their C&C domains to new IP addresses and
released a new version of the malware, but these types of activities were conducted
regularly even before the security firm released its findings to the public. However, the
encoding technique and key used by the attackers, which allowed investigators to identify
Infy samples, remained unchanged, which led experts to believe that the threat group was
unaware of their report.

The latest Infy variant, which attackers started deploying after most of their C&C domains
were hijacked, no longer records videos, but continues to steal files that could hold valuable
information. The new version also checks for the presence of antivirus products from
Kaspersky, Trend Micro and Avast.

The security firm reported in May that it uncovered a  new malware family that had been
used in espionage operations since at least 2007 by a group believed to be located in Iran.
The malware, dubbed “Infy,” remained under the radar because it had only been used in
highly targeted attacks.

While there are more than 40 variants of the Infy malware, researchers say there are only
two major versions. The original Infy has been used to infect more than 90 percent of
victims, while the more sophisticated version, Infy M, has been mainly leveraged against
high-value targets.

An analysis of the sinkholed domains led to the discovery of over 450 malware agents
installed on 326 systems spread across 35 countries in North America, Europe, Asia
(particularly the Middle East) and Australia. Experts noted that many of the victims were
Iranian citizens.

However, the cyberspies did not give up and used the remaining C&C domains they controlled
in an attempt to revive the campaign. In the end, the security firm managed to sinkhole all
the domains and completely shut down the campaign.

Palo Alto Networks initially managed to  take control of all but one of the C&C domains used
by the attackers. This prevented the group from continuing to steal information from most of
the victims.

After it published its report on Infy, Palo Alto Networks started working with the entities that
hosted the threat actor’s command and control (C&C) infrastructure in an effort to take
control of their domains.

Researchers Disrupt Iranian Cyberespionage
Campaign

Researchers at Palo Alto Networks have managed to disrupt an Iran-linked cyberespionage
campaign targeting governments and businesses from all around the world.

Malware & Threats Cybercrime Mobile & Wireless Risk & Compliance Security Architecture Management & Strategy SCADA / ICS

While Palo Alto Networks has managed to disrupt this campaign, researchers expect the

Critical Flaws Expose Symantec Customers to Remote
Attacks

Hackers Use Basic Tools After Breaching Your
Network

Previous Columns by Eduard Kovacs:

Researchers Disrupt Iranian Cyberespionage Campaign

ICS Cyber Security Conference Contact Us

Noodles & Company Confirms Payment Card Breach

Russia-Linked Cyberspies Target Google Accounts

SUBSCRIBE TO SECURITYWEEK

Security Experts: WRITE FOR US

Subscribe (Free) CISO Forum 2016

By Eduard Kovacs on June 29, 2016

Most Recent Most Read

Information Security News

Home › Virus & Threats

Suits and Spooks

Infosec Island

Tweet

Tweet

Share
Share

Share
Share

推薦推薦

推薦推薦

17

17

33

33

4

4

SECURITYWEEK NETWORK:

   
  
   
Download Free Security Resources from the SecurityWeek White Paper Library

sponsored links

Noodles & Company Confirms Payment Card Breach

Mining Industry Increasingly Targeted by Threat Actors

Overwhelming Majority of Android Devices Don't
Have Latest Security Patches

View Our Library of on Demand Security Webcasts

Visit The RSA Advanced Security Operations Resource Center

2016 ICS Cyber Security Conference - Atlanta, GA [Oct 24-27]

Tags:  NEWS & INDUSTRY   Virus & Threats

Historical Perspective on Dark Web Sale of 10
Million Health Records

The Increasing Importance of Security Analytics

Russia-Linked Cyberspies Target Google Accounts

New X25519 Cipher Throws Enterprise Surveillance
for a Loop

Researchers Disrupt Iranian Cyberespionage
Campaign

Critical Flaws Expose Symantec Customers to
Remote Attacks

The Great Analyst Debate Over Consumer IAM

DISCUSSION

PEOPLE RECENT POPULAR

Recent Comments

Jeff Chapman
Deciding which platform to buy
(Android versus iOS) means you're

going to be making some kind of sacrifice. If
security is a concern of yours (and it should be),
buying an iPhone makes a lot of sense.
Overwhelming Majority of Android Devices
Don't Have Latest Security Patches · 11
hours ago

brownj00
Yes, I am reminded of a recent news
story where Facebook founder Mark

Zukerberg's social media accounts on twitter,
instagram, and pinterest were all compromised
because he reused the same...
TeamViewer Denies Breach After Users Get
Hacked · 12 hours ago

BeSecure
If 74 percent of BlackHat attendees
say users were their biggest

headache, they what are they doing about it? A
culture that embraces information security as
one of its main tenants begins with...
What Keeps Security Professionals Up at
Night? Their Users · 1 day ago

Popular Topics

Security Community

Stay Intouch

About SecurityWeek

Information Security News

IT Security Newsletters

Suits and Spooks

ICS Cyber Security Conference

LinkedIn Group

Twitter

Facebook

Team

Advertising

Events

CISO Forum

InfosecIsland.Com

Cyber Weapon Discussion Group

Writing Opportunities

RSS Feed

Submit Tip

Security Intelligence Group

Feedback

Contact Us

Copyright © 2016 Wired Business Media. All Rights Reserved.  Privacy Policy | Terms of Use

IT Security News

Risk Management

Cybercrime

Cloud Security

Application Security

Smart Device Security

